As a student, I thrived in an environment of challenge and pressure. High expectations were set; nothing less was accepted. So I learned to relish that challenge and feed on that pressure. Others demanded excellence. I came to demand perfection from myself. And I learned and grew and learned some more. 

So when I returned to a high school setting--this time in my new role as a teacher--my impulse was to create a similar environment. I wanted to push my students and see them rise to the occasion. My teachers had asked me to struggle, to hang in there and fight through on my own. They had told me to take ownership of my learning. They hadn’t coddled. So neither did I. I pushed and I challenged. And I kept pushing, even when the kids started floundering. Good, I thought. This is the moment where learning occurs, where they slowly fight to find their footing again and emerge on the other side of confusion victorious. I pushed. “You can do it,” I kept saying.  “I don’t know what to do” they said. Still I kept pushing. They wanted explicit guidance and I withheld it. “Try something. Think of the most useless thing you could do, and then do anything else. At least you’ll know it’s not the worst idea to try.” Still, I was pushing.

Unsurprisingly, they shut down. In my effort to push my students to be “the best,” I actually lost touch with their humanity, their fear and anxiety and worry about making mistakes. I lost track of their age and uncertainty, their fragility. Mitchell could be pushed, I thought. He was definitely capable of grappling with the tough questions, the abstractions and their proofs. I pushed him hard and fast, demanded too much too soon, And he balked. In his eyes, I was being unfair and mean, setting him up for failure. I was cold, distant, aloof. I was the antagonist, not the ally he needed.  My focus on achieving this ideal outcome blinded me to the present moment. I lost my most valuable resource in the classroom: I squandered my kids’ trust. I failed to foster my own sense of connection to my students. I sacrificed process in the service of product; my teaching practice, and my students both suffered. 

This mistake was certainly a humbling experience. But more importantly, it was a transformative one. That first semester, recognizing that my students weren’t actually getting it, weren’t growing as mathematicians or as students, gave me a kick in the butt. I was doing exactly the opposite of what I ultimately hoped to be: I was squashing their interest in math, their natural curiosity, their willingness to reach out and pursue the paths opened by their questions, I needed to change my approach.

When I set out to plan the second semester, I had a mission. I’d become too obsessed with what I envisioned as the ideal outcome. In so doing, I’d lost sight of the most crucial ingredient in a classroom. If I wanted to foster a creative, brave, safe environment in my classroom, the primary foundation needed to be one of trust. Trust would only come by building and nurturing solid, one-on-one relationships. Without those interpersonal connections, my classroom would never be the open space I wanted it to be. My kids would remain reluctant to make mistakes, to swim in ambiguity, to try and fail and try again. They’d be stuck, mired in anxiety; they’d shut down when faced with a challenge instead of straightening to face it head-on. They’d never believe that I would catch them if they faltered, and so they’d do everything possible to avoid stumbling in the first place. Fear of messing up would stymie them completely. So it was up to me: I needed to show them that I had faith and confidence in them.  I needed them to know that I believed in them because they were capable of tackling what I threw at them. I needed to buoy them and re-invigorate their self-confidence. If I really wanted to reach them, I needed to know them. I’d forgotten that, so wrapped up was I in driving them towards brilliance.

What I took away from that year was perhaps the most important lesson any teacher can learn. It’s all well and good to craft “the perfect lesson plan,” or create that flawless activity that will lead students through a scaffolded discovery process and vault them to an aha moment. It’s necessary, probably, to have a clear picture of the desired outcome, to clearly articulate those end goals. But that’s not what makes a good teacher.  My mistake was fixating on how I thought things should look and run. Driven by a single-minded focus on the outcome, I adhered to my original course with an unyielding rigidity. But what makes a good teacher is entirely the opposite dexterity.

The perfect lesson plan will almost inevitably be derailed. Someone will despise your activity and make a mess of your project. And that’s the beauty of it. That’s the moment to embrace. Being present in the classroom, adapting to the students’ needs and questions as they arise -- that’s the most valuable thing a teacher can bring. An activity that goes horribly awry is kinda great. It means something happened, the kids found a mistake or figured out a shortcut; but either way, you know that they engaged with it. And you can challenge them to prove that there was an error, you can investigate the flaws with them, you can address the questions and confusions that have suddenly become clear. When you anticipated the problem taking 30 minutes and they’re all done in 5, you celebrate their growth with them. When a lesson totally stumps them, you might as well toss it out the window. No point continuing to use a hammer on a screw.  That became my charge to myself (and it continues to drive my work in the classroom): Respond to the kids in the moment. Meet them where they are. Solicit feedback and be ready to try another strategy, another explanation, another approach. Be transparent about expectations and goals. Most importantly: Be compassionate. Be in it with and alongside them.

Always, I’ve emphasized process over product. Don’t worry about the answer, I tell my PreCalculus students. The elegance of an approach matters just as much as the solution. Pounding a problem into submission through brute force isn’t all that satisfying--or efficient. But I didn’t heed my own advice. Obsessing over my desire for my students to overcome struggle, to try, to fail, to try again and (as Beckett exhorts) to “fail better,” I failed to equip them adequately along the way. Prerequisite to any willingness to make mistakes is a sense of camaraderie and community. Now, as I enter each new school year, each new semester, even each new unit, I’m acutely conscious of always fostering that sense in my classroom environment. Connections with my students remain a primary concern. And it’s no longer a fight between me and them. Now it does feel like a team effort. Sometimes, weirdly, they’ll shoo me away if I come over to check in. Thea panicked the other day in class: “Don’t tell me!” she exclaimed, waving me off with one hand while madly scribbling with the other. “I’m so close!” She’d been banging her head against the problem for two days, had filled sheets upon sheets of graph paper with discarded ideas and diagrams, vented her frustration at foiled attempts with heavy cross-outs and giant question-marks. She’d come to me -- the vision of defeat -- just that morning to sink into my office chair and say it was hopeless. I’d listened to her explain her thought process and prior attempts; I’d nodded sagely (I’d like to think), and said, “Can you keep going?;” she’d looked at me mutely, then indignantly. “Clarion!! A hint?!?!” I smiled. “You’re almost there.” She made a face at me. But this time, I’d done it right. This time, I’d built the foundation with her all through the fall. And she trusted that I wasn’t throwing her under the bus. She trusted that I wanted her to succeed. So she gathered her papers. And now, in class, she stood up from her desk and threw her pencil down in victory. “Boom. I. Did. It.” Others looked up in alarm. “Yes, Thea,” I thought. “**You** did it.”
