

So much of my work up until this point has been influenced by an undercurrent of multiculturalism. I wouldn't have anticipated it of myself when I was younger. In Lower School, I labeled myself "Asian" without a second's hesitation. Thoughtlessly, I erased my father's white half of the family until 2008, when my dad and I talked frankly about Obama. What did it mean to emphasize his blackness and ignore his biracial identity? It went unsaid that day, but I wondered what my dad felt when I acknowledged only my Asian heritage. That conversation sparked a growing interest for me, and I pursued a position as a Minority Peer Counselor Friend at college. There, I helped facilitate a freshmen orientation program that offered "an examination of the problems that divide our society" with the aim of "breaking down the barriers... [and] building understanding and community." We explored systems of oppression, their effects in our own lives, and in senior year, I led the workshop on heteronormativity and homophobia.

More recently, my years teaching in DC have been a stark reminder about the challenges involved in creating an inclusive and diverse community. The Field School prides itself on embracing all manner of students; it considers itself one of the most liberal and accepting independent school environments. And in general, I'd agree. But it's an independent school in DC, and it's the most expensive independent school in DC. The community reflects that. Attempts to diversify may help make the numbers more palatable; but day-to-day experience in the building constrasts with the data. Being here--in an extremely privileged, extremely white school-- has taught me much about the importance of naming privilege, leaning into discomfort, disturbing the silence. 

I am a young female math teacher. I am a half-Chinese math teacher. Each statement carries weight. Each statement carries assumptions. One perhaps seems more unusual, one more unsuprising.
When parents walk into my room on Back-to-School-Night, I wonder what they see first. I am young (One of them once asked me if I was a sophomore or a junior). I am a rather androgynous and masculine-leaning lesbian. 
My Chinese grandparents were forced to flee the Cultural Revolution under Mao. My white-ancestors were plantation owners in Texas.

Ada's emphasis on diversity and inclusivity is a compelling draw for me. It is, in fact, imperative. As I make my next move, I know I want to be part of a deliberate community: I want to embed myself in a rich texture of self-aware and open-minded humans. I want to hear and learn and grow and be pushed by a variety of other voices; I want to be in a place where I can openly share my own story, and bring my own authentic self to the table, knowing that those around me will do the same; I want to join my voice with a chorus of others in purposeful, unflinching conversation. Right now, merely floating along with the current of society seems a dangerous proposition, allowing us to be moved in an unsavory direction. I'm feeling the urge to stand up and speak up. The spheres of influence in today's society--whether political or commercial or informational--are largely dominated by heteronormative white men. On the Hill, in CEO offices, in many software engineering headquarters across the country, the white male perspective is the one that reigns. And while many white men are our great allies, I think it's important that their perspective does not go unchallenged. Traditionally "othered" voices need to be heard. And my hope, my driving goal, is to help such folks take their rightful place at the table.
