In 5 years, I want to be programming as a software engineer -- and I want to be doing that in a context of education, legal, and/or social justice work. I want to be part of a team; I want to be grappling with knotty questions; I want to know the relevance of my work in the context of driving social change (not just "social progress" along an unquestioned trajectory); I want to feel intellectually stimulated on a daily basis; and I want to be fully immersed in something that demands emotional and mental investment.

Those are my big-picture, kinda lofty goals. More specifically, I'd ideally have found a way (or be on my way) to combining tech and engineering with my passion for social justice through teaching or legal reform. Blending my interests in education and coding might most obviously lead me to think about teaching math through coding. So many people are turned off by math, and maybe this is a way to reach them or show them more directly the relevance in the world. But beyond that: I want to empower students, youth, and underrepresented populations to speak with conviction, and I want to provide them with the relevant tools for letting themselves be heard. Programming as a tool in the service of that empowerment seems a powerful potential. Any work that I could do as part of a non-profit or organization involved in that mission would be, in my mind, the most fulfilling possibility. Alternatively, I'd be thrilled to find a niche in which I could apply coding skills to forward the movement for gay rights (I use that term in the most broad sense). Right now, the need for strong advocates, allies, and legal scholars seems particularly pressing. We need peeople who are well-versed in constitutional law and equal protection; we need folks who are familiar with the legal history of individual rights; we need wielders of that knowledge to be able to make themselves heard and known and felt. If I can contribute to that effort--combining a proficiency in programming with a passion for legal protection--in order to help fight for the voiceless and earn support for their cause, I'd finally feel like I was doing something worthwhile.
